---
title: cars
date: '2021'
description: "professing my love for public transportation and infrastructure as a means to achieve human-centric urban design."
---
<meta name="robots" content="noindex, nofollow, noarchive">

rugged individualism is the frequently touted idea that in the united states, you succeed solely on your own merits, accepting no handouts. the philosophy has been steadily ingrained in the american psyche since the conception of the country, which was sold to immigrants as a place where social and economic mobility exists through hard work alone. most will be familiar with the concept by another glamorized term: the "american dream". 

the american dream, and thus rugged individualism has always been inextricably linked in a conflict with infrastructure. settlers who first colonized the american frontier lived competitively and isolated, and destroyed the infrastructure of the continent's native inhabitants. herbert hoover popularized the terms during his presidency in the late 1920s, at the dawn of the worst period of economic downturn in the 20th century, when americans were largely left to fend for themselves from a poorly regulated banking system and lack of public spending. ironically, president hoover greatly worsened the depression by extensively [raising taxes and tariffs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smoot%E2%80%93Hawley_Tariff_Act) throughout his tenure.

one major symptom of rugged individualism (besides the sentiment of american vaccine hesitancy in response to the covid-19 pandemic, for which [you don't need me to inform you of the consequences](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/covid19/mortality-overview.htm)) is nimbyism (not in my backyard-ism), a modern-day form of hyperindividualist thinking. nimbys acknowledge the need for infrastructure, housing, and public services, but stand agaisnt new land use in their specific neighborhoods. nimbyism manifests itself in the form of municipal zoning codes, allowing wealthy homeowners to codify suburbs filled exclusively with single-family homes into law, preventing the construction of dense affordable housing and further dispersing the population throughout the vast suburbs.  

from the myopic perspective of its adherents, cars are the vehicles of the american dream. there's nothing more isolating than sitting in a private metal box, protected from fellow commuters. proponents of the car might argue that driving gives them the freedom that makes the united states so great to begin with. of course, [rugged individualism is unsustainable](https://www.thehastingscenter.org/rugged-american-individualism-is-a-myth-and-its-killing-us/), [the american dream is a complete fabrication](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ezthd6A3tiw) and, by extension, driving is just about the least free mode of transportation that exists in every sense of the word.

it's no secret that cars have an immense environmental footprint due to their engines combusting gasoline and diesel, directly contributing to about [29% of greenhouse gas emissions](https://www.epa.gov/transportation-air-pollution-and-climate-change/carbon-pollution-transportation) in the united states. that makes transportation the largest single source of greenhouse gas emissions in the country. cars crashes were also responsible for [an estimated 38,000 deaths](https://www.nhtsa.gov/press-releases/2020-fatality-data-show-increased-traffic-fatalities-during-pandemic) in 2020.

perhaps more insidiously though, the physical footprint required for a majority of city residents to own a private vehicle has led to the design of american cities as a vast expanse of asphalt, where getting into a car can be required to make a ten-minute trip to the grocery store. 

private vehicles are generally much less efficient at transporting people than buses or trains given the amount of space they require. this causes congestion on roadways, leading to absurdly long commute times for motorists and bus riders alike in many cities. it also requires dedicating vast swaths of land for parking, which could otherwise be used for green space in a city.

these are problems that electric vehicles will not solve. electric vehicles, and cars in general, have been manipulated to be a glamorous luxury good for the rich and a prohibitively expensive commodity for the poor. private vehicle infrastructure and electric charging stations are necessary for transit between the family estate and a summer home, and from the suburb into the financial district for work. yet, non-driving city-dwellers who may not be able to afford a car have to bear the burden of this necessity by paying for asphalt grids that they don't use and [noise pollution that they don't create](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CTV-wwszGw8).

despite all of the above, nothing seems to incite intra-class warfare more than cars. everyone is just trying to get to work, and yet, the phenomenon of [road rage](https://www.dmv.org/how-to-guides/road-rage.php) is well-documented online. working americans shame each other for owning less extravagant cars. it's a peculiar yet unequivocally american blend of mindless consumerism and toxic masculinity.

public transportation, on the other hand, gives riders the autonomy to get around on their own terms. there's no need to worry about where to park upon arriving at a destination, and you aren't locked into the same mode of transportation both ways of a trip. trains and buses, from a commuter's perspective, are essentially self-driving, giving workers the opportunity to enjoy some down time before and after work. despite fear-mongering by politicians and lobbyists, public transportation is no less safe than walking on the street, and is [certainly much safer than being in a car](https://injuryfacts.nsc.org/home-and-community/safety-topics/deaths-by-transportation-mode/).

conversely to the struggle of gridlock and highway traffic, public transportation is a collaborative effort. everyone has the same goal: get to their stop. however, being punctual while taking the train or bus isn't dependent on the actions of your fellow commuters. when it works it's an efficient, well-oiled machine, and when problems arise riders can collectively pit their anger against the local metro transit authority instead of each other.

cycling is another mode of transportation that is drastically more space-efficient and vastly more sustainable than driving a car. bike infrastructure is sparse in most cities; curiously more so in those that also have meager public transportation. like the latter, cycling has also been harangued into the public conscious as dangerous. while still much safer than being in a car on the highway, i concede that urban cycling in america is usually not as safe as it could be. personally, i've biked in various cities almost every day since 2016 and have gotten into a total of two pretty minor physical accidents at the hands of drivers. while bicyclists have a reputation of being lawless on roads, it's important to understand that [following traffic laws in cities can be more dangerous for us than not](https://youtu.be/EpGuv2C0nfk). again, that completely stems from a lack of sufficiently safe and extensive infrastructure.

there is some classism and elitism surrounding bikes. due to the ubiquitous desire to live in human-centered neighborhoods, most safely bikeable neighborhoods are prohibitively expensive to live in. there are also gatekeepers to bicycling as a hobby, as with anything ever. however, unlike vehicle infrastructure, [bicycle infrastructure benefits everyone](https://youtu.be/_DNNIB_PdaA). in new york, bicycle infrastructure drives the majority of the food delivery sector of the gig economy, which consists mainly of part-time or lower income workers. good bicycle infrastructure allows them to do their jobs more safely. it also benefits drivers and riders of public transportation, by reducing strain on their respective systems and thereby lowering congestion.

in summary, i will never get behind the wheel of a car for as long as i live. people **need** to stop driving so much if we want our planet to remain livable. if you are american, live in a city, and are physically able, consider trying public transportation or your local bikeshare program. it really isn't half as dangerous as you've been led to believe.
